[DOCS-1700] Update docs for automation history (#1803)
wandb/docs: models/automations.mdx

<EnterpriseCloudOnly/>
</Info>

This page describes _automations_ in W&B. [Create an automation](/models/automations/create-automations/) to trigger workflow steps, such as automated model testing and deployment, based on an event in W&B.

For example, an automation can notify a Slack channel when a new version is created, trigger an automated testing webhook when the `production` alias is added to an artifact, or start a validation job only when a run's `loss` is within acceptable bounds.

<Info>
Looking for companion tutorials for automations? 
- [Learn to automatically trigger a Github Action for model evaluation and deployment](https://wandb.ai/wandb/wandb-model-cicd/reports/Model-CI-CD-with-W-B--Vmlldzo0OTcwNDQw).
- [Watch a video demonstrating automatically deploying a model to a Sagemaker endpoint](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5CMj_w3DaQ).
- [Watch a video series introducing automations](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD80i8An1OEGECFPgY-HPCNjXgGu-qGO6&feature=shared).
</Info>

## Automation events

> Automations can be triggered by events related to runs or artifacts in a collection, project, or registry. An automation can start:

Author: ```suggestion
Automations can be triggered by events related to runs or artifacts in a collection, project, or registry. For example, an automation can start:
```

> - When a run metric meets a defined absolute or relative threshold. For example, trigger when a run's `loss` is less than 0.01 or when a run's `accuracy` improves by 5%.

Author: ```suggestion
- When a run's status changes to **Running**, **Finished**, **Failed**.
- When a run metric meets a defined absolute or relative threshold. For example, trigger when a run's `loss` is less than 0.01 or when a run's `accuracy` improves by 5%.
```

> - When an event occurs in a project or registry. For example, trigger when a new version of a model artifact is created or when the `production` alias is added to a model artifact.

Author: ```suggestion
- When an artifact version is created, linked, or tagged in a project, registry, or collection. For example, trigger when a new version of a model artifact is created or when the `production` alias is added to a model artifact.
```

<EnterpriseCloudOnly/>
</Info>

This page describes _automations_ in W&B. [Create an automation](/models/automations/create-automations/) to trigger workflow steps, such as automated model testing and deployment, based on an event in W&B.

For example, an automation can notify a Slack channel when a new version is created, trigger an automated testing webhook when the `production` alias is added to an artifact, or start a validation job only when a run's `loss` is within acceptable bounds.

<Info>
Looking for companion tutorials for automations? 
- [Learn to automatically trigger a Github Action for model evaluation and deployment](https://wandb.ai/wandb/wandb-model-cicd/reports/Model-CI-CD-with-W-B--Vmlldzo0OTcwNDQw).
- [Watch a video demonstrating automatically deploying a model to a Sagemaker endpoint](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5CMj_w3DaQ).
- [Watch a video series introducing automations](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD80i8An1OEGECFPgY-HPCNjXgGu-qGO6&feature=shared).
</Info>

## Automation events

> Automations can be triggered by events related to runs or artifacts in a project or registry. An automation can start:

Reviewer: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
Automations can be triggered by events related to runs or artifacts in a collection, project, or registry. An automation can start:
```

- When a run metric meets a defined absolute or relative threshold. For example, trigger when a run's `loss` is less than 0.01 or when a run's `accuracy` improves by 5%.

> - When an artifact event occurs in a project or registry. For example, trigger when a new model version is created or when the `production` alias is added to a model.

Reviewer: **suggestion:** The current text is technically accurate, and I definitely want to avoid describing features that **don't** exist now, but I think it's worth framing this less narrowly.  TL;DR I'd like to ensure we don't suggest or reinforce the impression that Automations is only ever meant for "artifacts and runs".

The fact that the non-run events are all related to artifacts is a historical accident.  Even within the current system, it wouldn't be too hard to add triggering events on other operations on W&B objects (e.g. "when user is added to a team / when tag is removed from a collection / when a registry is renamed / etc." -- it just happens these don't exist and/or aren't prioritized right _now_.)

```suggestion
- When an event occurs in a project or registry. For example, trigger when a new version of a model artifact is created or when the `production` alias is added to a model artifact.
```

For more details, see [Automation events and scopes](/models/automations/automation-events/).

## Automation actions

When an event triggers an automation, it can perform one of these actions:

### Slack notification

> Send a message to a Slack channel with details about the triggering event. The message includes relevant information such as the entity name, user who triggered the event, and a link to view more details in W&B.

Reviewer: **suggestion:** entity name and user aren't included in the default message.  It **is** possible to customize the message to include the entity/user -- by including those template variables in the custom message -- though I don't think we have specific examples of that in our docs yet.  This is expressly supported in the Automations API; need to remind myself if we currently allow this through the UI as well

> Send a message to a Slack channel with details about the triggering event. The message includes relevant information such as the entity name, user who triggered the event, and a link to view more details in W&B.

Author: ```suggestion
Send a message to a Slack channel with details about the triggering event. The message summarizes the event, with a link to view more details in W&B.
```

### Webhook
Call a webhook URL with a JSON payload containing information about the triggering event. This enables integration with external systems like CI/CD pipelines, model deployment services, or custom workflows. The webhook payload includes:

> - Event details (type, entity information)

Reviewer: **suggestion:** the webhook payload is any JSON-serializable object and entirely up to the user -- it doesn't include anything by default
```suggestion
Call a webhook URL with a JSON payload containing information about the triggering event. This enables integration with external systems like CI/CD pipelines, model deployment services, or custom workflows. The body of the webhook request may be any JSON-serializable payload.
```

<Info>
Looking for companion tutorials for automations? 
- [Learn to automatically trigger a Github Action for model evaluation and deployment](https://wandb.ai/wandb/wandb-model-cicd/reports/Model-CI-CD-with-W-B--Vmlldzo0OTcwNDQw).
- [Watch a video demonstrating automatically deploying a model to a Sagemaker endpoint](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5CMj_w3DaQ).
- [Watch a video series introducing automations](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD80i8An1OEGECFPgY-HPCNjXgGu-qGO6&feature=shared).
</Info>

## Automation events

Automations can be triggered by events related to these W&B entities:

- **Runs**: Trigger when a run meets or changes by a threshold on a specific metric. For example, trigger when a run's `loss` is less than 0.01 or when a run's `accuracy` improves by 5%.
- **Artifacts**: Trigger when a new artifact version is created or when a specific alias is added to an artifact version. For example, trigger when a new model version is created or when the `production` alias is added to a model.

> - **Registries**: Trigger when a new model version is linked to a registry or when an alias is added to a model version in the registry. For example, trigger when a new model version is linked to the `Model Registry` or when the `production` alias is added to a model version in the registry.

Reviewer: **question:** Curious, is there a reason we decided to add separate bullet points for "Artifacts" vs "Registries" events?  This change seems to imply that the events themselves are qualitatively different categories -- as opposed to the same kinds of events (create artifact, link artifact, adding an alias, etc.) that can occur within a particular scope (collection, project, or registry).

Not strictly about automations history, but it seems like this could end up being misleading and/or noticeably inconsistent with:
- users' prior expectations, for those that already use automations
- the way automations are currently organized within both (a) the existing UI and (b) the automations API

Author: I think it is because Noa wanted to clarify that artifacts aren't stored in a registry but they are stored in a project, so registry automations can't be triggered on artifact creation, only linking. Did I misunderstand?

Author: PTAL, I simplified and restructured the Automation Events page to be less bifurcated, and also found some duplicated procedural instructions to remove since it's a reference page. Thanks for the suggestion.

For more details, see [Automation events and scopes](/models/automations/automation-events/).

## Automation actions

When an event triggers an automation, it can perform one of these actions:

### Slack notification
Send a message to a Slack channel with details about the triggering event. The message includes relevant information such as the entity name, user who triggered the event, and a link to view more details in W&B.

### Webhook
Call a webhook URL with a JSON payload containing information about the triggering event. This enables integration with external systems like CI/CD pipelines, model deployment services, or custom workflows. The webhook payload includes:
- Event details (type, entity information)

> - User information

Reviewer: **issue:** IIRC this isn't accurate, could you elaborate on what this is referring to?  ("user information" is inherently ambiguous -- e.g. whether this refers to the user who last edited the automation, the user responsible for the triggering event, etc.  None of those are currently in the payload by default, but let me know if you had something else in mind)

Author: I'm not sure, I'll remove it and the timestamp.

> - Timestamp

Reviewer: **issue:** this is also not part of the payload

> - Timestamp

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - Custom payload data you configure

Reviewer: **issue:** the only payloads that webhooks support is this one (i.e. a custom, user-configured payload)

> - Custom payload data you configure

Author: ```suggestion
```
